README.md, before:

# _Animal Shelter API - Ruby Independent Project Six_

 The sixth independent project for the Ruby and Rails course for the coding school, Epicodus, written on August 23rd, 2019.

#### By _**Daniel Hongel**_

## Description

This application is an independent coding project from a Ruby coding class at Epicodus. This application is intended to demonstrate an understanding of Ruby and the Rails framework. This is a website an online store that carries specialty products.

## Setup/Installation Requirements

* _These instructions are aimed for MacOS, and may require slight adjustments if using another OS_
* _Clone this repository_
* _Open terminal and type **git clone [git link]**_
* _Navigate to project directory using **cd** in terminal_
* _Open project in text editor (atom)_
* _Type **bundle install** in terminal to load Gems_
* _You will need to have PostgresQL installed and running_
* _If you do not have Postgres running on your machine, please follow these steps:_
* _--> In another terminal tab, type $ **brew install postgres** (Mac OS)_
* _--> run $ **echo "export PGDATA=/usr/local/var/postgres" >> ~/.bash_profile**_
* _--> run $ **echo "export PGHOST=/tmp" >> ~/.bash_profile**_
* _--> run $ **source ~/.bash_profile**_
* _--> run $ **postgres** in order to start the postgres server_
* _--> If you encounter an error finding a user database, then run $ **createdb $USER**_
* _In terminal, while in the root project directory, run $ **rails db:create**_
* _To run tests, run $ **rspec** in terminal_
* _To run the program, run $ **rails s** in terminal_
* _Open your preferred web browser and navigate to localhost:3000_
* _The best way to make an API request will be to use a program such as Postman_

## Routes

For Creating or updating Animal objects, the required parameters are:
* name (case sensitive for storing but not retrieving)
* animal_type (Dog, Cat, or other)
* age ( Range must be from 1-30 years )
* breed (Specific breed)
* content (Comments or descriptions)

| Query | URL | Method | Return |
| ------- |:------:| ------:| ------:|
| All Animals | localhost:3000/v1/animals | GET | A list of all animals in shelter |
| Specific Animal by Id | localhost:3000/v1/animals/:id | GET | Target animal by id |
| Animals by Name | localhost:3000/v1/animals?name=Sam | GET | Entries for "Sam" or other name entered (case insensitive)|
| Animals by Animal Type | localhost:3000/v1/animals?animal_type=dog | GET | Entries for "dog" or "cat" or other animal_type entered (case insensitive) |
| Animals by Name and Animal Type | localhost:3000/v1/animals?name=Sam&animal_type=Cat | GET | Entries for "Sam" and "Cat" or other name or animal_type entered (case insensitive) |
| Random Animal | localhost:3000/random/ | GET | Returns one randomly selected animal |
| Create Animal Entry | localhost:3000/v1/animals/?name=bob&animal_type=cat&age=5&breed=Serrade petit&content=I love to be pet | POST | Http status :created and returns entry including id|
| Update Animal Entry | localhost:3000/v1/animals/?name=bob&animal_type=cat&age=5&breed=Serrade petit&content=I love to be pet | PUT | The animal entry for [ANIMAL NAME] has been updated successfully. |
| Delete Animal Entry | localhost:3000/v1/animals/57 | DELETE | The animal entry for bob has been successfully removed. |

## Specs

| Behavior | Input | Output |
| ------------- |:-------------:| -----:|
||||
||||

## Known Bugs

No known bugs

## Support and contact details

Please contact me if you encounter issues with this program, have suggestions, or would like to contribute to this or future projects. I can be reached at:  fatherofdharma@gmail.com.

## Technologies Used

* Ruby
* RubyGems
* Atom
* GitHub
* PostgreSQL
* Rails

### License
_This software is licensed under MIT license._

Copyright (c) 2019 **_Daniel Hongel_**

Commit message:

add some specs to readme and changed create, update, and destroy  methods to be bang methods.

README.md, after:

# _Animal Shelter API - Ruby Independent Project Six_

 The sixth independent project for the Ruby and Rails course for the coding school, Epicodus, written on August 23rd, 2019.

#### By _**Daniel Hongel**_

## Description

This application is an independent coding project from a Ruby coding class at Epicodus. This application is intended to demonstrate an understanding of Ruby and the Rails framework. This an API for an animal shelter, which returns information regarding animals in their database.

## Setup/Installation Requirements

* _These instructions are aimed for MacOS, and may require slight adjustments if using another OS_
* _Clone this repository_
* _Open terminal and type **git clone [git link]**_
* _Navigate to project directory using **cd** in terminal_
* _Open project in text editor (atom)_
* _Type **bundle install** in terminal to load Gems_
* _You will need to have PostgresQL installed and running_
* _If you do not have Postgres running on your machine, please follow these steps:_
* _--> In another terminal tab, type $ **brew install postgres** (Mac OS)_
* _--> run $ **echo "export PGDATA=/usr/local/var/postgres" >> ~/.bash_profile**_
* _--> run $ **echo "export PGHOST=/tmp" >> ~/.bash_profile**_
* _--> run $ **source ~/.bash_profile**_
* _--> run $ **postgres** in order to start the postgres server_
* _--> If you encounter an error finding a user database, then run $ **createdb $USER**_
* _In terminal, while in the root project directory, run $ **rails db:create**_
* _To run tests, run $ **rspec** in terminal_
* _To run the program, run $ **rails s** in terminal_
* _Open your preferred web browser and navigate to localhost:3000_
* _The best way to make an API request will be to use a program such as Postman_

## Routes

For Creating or updating Animal objects, the required parameters are:
* name (case sensitive for storing but not retrieving)
* animal_type (Dog, Cat, or other)
* age ( Range must be from 1-30 years )
* breed (Specific breed)
* content (Comments or descriptions)

| Query | URL | Method | Return |
| ------- |:------:| ------:| ------:|
| All Animals | localhost:3000/v1/animals | GET | A list of all animals in shelter |
| Specific Animal by Id | localhost:3000/v1/animals/:id | GET | Target animal by id |
| Animals by Name | localhost:3000/v1/animals?name=Sam | GET | Entries for "Sam" or other name entered (case insensitive)|
| Animals by Animal Type | localhost:3000/v1/animals?animal_type=dog | GET | Entries for "dog" or "cat" or other animal_type entered (case insensitive) |
| Animals by Name and Animal Type | localhost:3000/v1/animals?name=Sam&animal_type=Cat | GET | Entries for "Sam" and "Cat" or other name or animal_type entered (case insensitive) |
| Random Animal | localhost:3000/random/ | GET | Returns one randomly selected animal |
| Create Animal Entry | localhost:3000/v1/animals/?name=bob&animal_type=cat&age=5&breed=Serrade petit&content=I love to be pet | POST | Http status :created and returns entry including id|
| Update Animal Entry | localhost:3000/v1/animals/?name=bob&animal_type=cat&age=5&breed=Serrade petit&content=I love to be pet | PUT | The animal entry for [ANIMAL NAME] has been updated successfully. |
| Delete Animal Entry | localhost:3000/v1/animals/57 | DELETE | The animal entry for bob has been successfully removed. |

## Specs

| Behavior | Input | Output |
| ------------- |:-------------:| -----:|
| Create an animal object | name: bob, animal_type: dog, age: 5, breed: labrador, content: I like to be pet |  :created and returns the same information |
| Update an animal object | name: Spike, animal_type: Dog, age: 5, breed: Golden Retriever, content: I like to be pet | The entry for Spike has been updated successfully. |
| Delete an animal object by id | name: Bob id:57 (other info, etc...) | The animal entry for bob has been successfully removed. |
| Will not create an Animal object without all parameters required| [All fields blank ]| Validation failed: Name can't be blank, Animal type can't be blank, Age can't be blank, Age is not included in the list, Breed can't be blank, Content can't be blank |

## Known Bugs

No known bugs

## Support and contact details

Please contact me if you encounter issues with this program, have suggestions, or would like to contribute to this or future projects. I can be reached at:  fatherofdharma@gmail.com.

## Technologies Used

* Ruby
* RubyGems
* Atom
* GitHub
* PostgreSQL
* Rails

### License
_This software is licensed under MIT license._

Copyright (c) 2019 **_Daniel Hongel_**
